# Chapter 1: Introduction to Computers and Programming

## 1.2 Hardware and Software

### Hardware

**Hardware**— All of the physical devices, or components, that a computer is made of.

### Parts of a typical computer system:

- Central Processing Unit (CPU)
- Main memory
- Secondary storage devices
- Input devices (e.g., mouse, keyboard, camera, etc.)
- Output devices (e.g., monitors, printers, speakers, etc.)

### The CPU

**Central processing unit (CPU)**— The component of the computer that actually runs programs and software.

Early CPUs were big and made of vacuum tubes and switches.  Today's CPUs are small chips known as _microprocessors_.  

### Main memory

**Main Memory**— A chip where the computer stores a program while the program is running, as well as the data that the program is working with.

For instance, when writing documents in word processors, both are stored on main memory, commonly known as _random-access memory_, or _RAM_.

Data is stored at random locations in main memory, and the CPU can quickly access it.

RAM is _volatile_, which means data is stored temporarily and is lost when power is no longer supplied to it.

### Secondary storage

**Secondary storage**— A type of non-volatile memory that holds data for long periods of time, even when there is no power to the computer.  

Programs are stored in secondary memory and are then loaded onto main memory at the request of the CPU.

A _disk drive_ is a common type of secondary storage that stores data by magnetically encoding it onto a spinning circular disk.

A _solid-state drive_ is a type of secondary storage with no moving parts and is quicker than disk drives.

_USB_ drives are small, inexpensive, reliable, devices that plug into the computer's universal serial bus (USB) port and store data in _flash memory_.

Optical devices such as compact discs (CDs) and digital versatile discs (DVDs) encode data on the surface as a series of pits.

### Input devices

_Input_ is any data the computer collects from people and other devices.

### Output devices

_Output_ is any data the computer produces for people or for other devices (e.g., sales report, list of names, graphical image).

### Software

Everything the computer does is under control of software, either system software or application software.

### System software

**System software**— Programs that control and manage the basic operations of a computer.

Types of system software:
-Operating systems: An _operating system_ is the most fundamental set of programs on a computer that manages connected devices, controls hardware, and permits the reading and writing of data.
-Utility programs: A _utility program_ performs a specialized task that enhances the computer's operation or safeguards.
-Software development tools: Programs used to create, modify, and test software such as assemblers and compilers.

### Application software

**Application software**— Programs that make a computer useful for everyday tasks. such as Microsoft Word, Google Chrome, and Call of Duty.

## 1.3 How Computers Store Data

Data is stored using a _binary numbering system_ that uses two digits: 0 and 1.

A computer's memory is divided into tiny _bytes_, which are divided into smaller units called _bits_, or _binary digit_.  

Bits are tiny electrical components that can hold a positive or negative charge.

When a piece of data is stored in a byte, the computer sets eight bits to an on/off pattern like:

|off|on|off|off|on|on|off|on|  
|-|-|-|-|-|-|-|-|
|0|1|0|0|1|1|0|1|

### Storing Numbers

The binary number system is base-2 (since it contains two digits in the system).  Each bit in a byte is assigned to a number, starting with 0, from right to left:

|2^7|2^6|2^5|2^4|2^3|2^2|2^1|2^0|  
|-|-|-|-|-|-|-|-|
|1|0|0|1|1|1|0|1|

To determine the value of a binary number you simply add up the position values of all the 1s, therefore, the above binary number is 157 in base-10.

The maxiumum value that can be stored in a byte is 255 (when all bits are storing a 1); however, 256 digits can be represented by a byte (0-255).

If you need to store a number larger than 255, use another byte.  The maximum value that can be stored in two bytes is 65,535.

### Storing Characters

Characters are stored in memory by being first converted to numerical codes. Such numerical codes are then stored in memory as a binary number.

The _American Standard Code for Information Interchange_ (ASCII) stores 128 numerical codes representing English letters, various punctuation marks, etc.  For example, the ASCII numerical code for uppercase A is 65.  It is then stored in memory like so:

|2^7|2^6|2^5|2^4|2^3|2^2|2^1|2^0|  
|-|-|-|-|-|-|-|-|
|0|1|0|0|0|0|0|1|

`2^0 + 2^6 = 65`

Since ASCII is limited to 128 characters, another character set was needed.  To remedy this, the Unicode character set was created in the 1990s.  _Unicode_ is compatible with ASCII, but can also represent characters for many of the languages in the world.  Unicode stores characters in 2 bytes.

### Advanced Number Storage

Negative numbers and real numbers cannot be represented using the simple binary numbering technique we discussed.

Negative numbers are encode using _two's complement_, and real numbers are encoded in _floating-point notation_.  

### Other Types of Data

Computers are _digital_ devices, or devices that use binary numbers.

Computers can store images using binary data by converting each pixel or _picture element_ to a numerical code that represents the pixel's color.  The numberical code is then stored in memory as a binary number.

Audio is broken down into smaller pieces known as _samples_, and each sample is converted to a binary number and stored in memory.  A quality audio file is divided into more than 44,000 samples per second.

## 1.4 How a Program Works

A CPU can perform simple operations on pieces of data with the assistance of a program, which lists instructions for the CPU.  For a CPU to carry out an instruction, it must be written in _machine language_.  

A machine language instruction exists for every operation that a CPU is capable of performing (e.g., addition, subtraction, etc.).  This is called an _instruction set_.

Each brand of microprocessor has its own unique instruction set, which is only understood by microprocessors of the same brand.  

Programs are stored on secondary storage devices, and when the CPU needs to execute it, the program is loaded into the RAM.  

When a CPU executes the instructions in a program, it engages in the _fetch-decode-execute cycle_:
- **Fetch** The first step of the cycle is to fetch the next instruction from memory into the CPU.
- **Decode** The previously fetched command is then decoded to determine which operation should be performed by the CPU.
- **Execute** The appropriate operation is executed.

### From Machine Language to Assembly Language

Since CPUs only understand machine language, and programming in such a language is tedious, _assembly language_ was created.  

Assembly language is a low-level computer programming language that is the closest a programming language gets to machine language.

Assembly uses short words, or _mnemonics_ in place of binary instructions.  

Since CPUs have different instruction sets, there are different versions of Assembly for processors.

Assembly language must eventually be converted to binary for the CPU to execute the instructions.  This is done by an _assembler_.

### High-level Languages

_High-level languages_ allow you to create powerful and complex programs without knowing how the CPU operates and without writing large numbers of low-level instructions.

### Key Words, Operators, and Syntax: An Overview

Each high-level language has its own set of predefined words that the programmer must use to write a program.  Such words are known as _reserved words_.  

Examples of reserved words in Python:
- and
- global
- return

All programming languages have _operators_ which perform operations on _operands_.

`3 + 4`

In the above _statement_, '3' and '4' are operands and '+' is an operator.

Languages also have _syntax_, which is a set of rules that must be strictly followed when writing programs.  

### Compilers and Interpreters

High-level languages are converted to machine language through the use of _compilers_ and _interpreters_.

A compiler is a program that translates a high-level language program into a separate machine language program.  

An interpreter is a program that translates each high-level instruction and immediately executes it.

Sometimes code contains a mistake, or _syntax error_, from misspelled key words, to the incorrect usage of an operator.

## 1.5 Using Python

### Python Interpreter

You can use the interpreter in two modes: interactive mode and script mode.  In _interactive mode_, the interpreter waits for you to type Python statements on the keyboard and then executes it.  In _script mode_, the interpreter reads the contents of a file, or _Python program_, and executes each statement as it reads from the file.

### Interactive Mode

Interactive mode can be initialized by navigating to the shell and typing 'python.'

The '>>>' indicates that the interpreter is waiting for you to type a Python statement.

### Writing Python Programs and Running Them in Script Mode

Interactive mode is used for testing code.  The statements you enter aren't saved; the results simply are displayed on a screen.

If you want to save a set of Python statements as a program, you save them in a '.py' file and execute the file using the interpeter from the shell.  This is using the interpreter in script mode.

To run a file, simply:

`python test.py`

### The IDLE Programming Environment

In addition to using the Python interpreter in script mode and interactive mode, you can use an _integrated development environment_, which is a program that gives you tools to write, execture, and test a program.

With IDLE, you can write programs, save them to disk, and execute them.












