# Chapter 2: Input, Processing, and Output

## 2.1 Designing a Program

Concept: Programs must be carefully designed before they are written.  During the design progress, programmers use tools such as pseudocode and flowcharts.

### The Program Development Cycle

The _program development cycle_ is a process that is used in the creation of programs that work correctly.

Stages of the cycle:
1. **Design the Program** A program must be designed carefully before it is actually written.
2. **Write the Code** After a design is established, the programmer writes the program in a high-level programming language and conforms to the syntax of that language.
3. **Correct Syntax Errors** In order for the program to correctly be translated to machine language, it must not contain any syntax errors.  Before the program is run correctly, such errors must be corrected.
4. **Test the Program** Once the program compiles, it should be tested to determine if there are any logical errors.  A _logic error_ prevents the program from producing a desirable output.
5. **Correct Logic Errors** If the program produces incorrect results, it must be debugged.  In the event that the design of the program must change, the cycle repeats until there are no more errors.

### More About the Design Process

Steps in designing the program:
1. Understand the task that the program is to perform.
2. Determine the steps that must be taken to perform the task.

### Understand the Program's Task

You should determine what the program should do prior to determining the steps it should perform.  To help with this, you work with the _customer_, or the individual for which you are building the program by asking questions.

After information is gathered from the customer, the programmer creates a list of requirements.  A _software requirement_ is simply a single task that the program must perform in order to satisfy the customer.

### Determine the Program's Perfomed Steps

Break down the tasks into a series of logical steps, or an _algorithm_.  

Example algorithm: calculate and display gross pay for an hourly paid employee.

1. Get the number of hours worked.
2. Get the hourly pay rate.
3. Multiply the number of hours worked by the hourly pay rate.
4. Display the result of the calculation in step 3.

Tools such as psuedocode and flowcharts are used to translate algorithms into code.

### Pseudocode

_Pseudocode_ is fake code that is used to create "mockups" of programs.

Example psuedocode:

```
    Input hours worked
    Input hourly pay rate
    Calculate gross pay as hours worked multiplied by pay rate
    Display gross pay
```

### Flowcharts

A _flowchart_ is a diagram that graphically depicts the steps that take place in a program.  Such diagrams usually contain ovals, parallelograms, and rectangles.

- Ovals are _terminal symbols_ that mark the program's starting and ending points.
- Parallelograms represent _inputs_ and _outputs_. 
- Rectangles are _processing symbols_ that depict steps in which the program performs process on data.

Such symbols are connected via arrows to represent the "flow" of the program.

## 2.2 Input, Processing, and Output

Typical steps performed by computer programs:
1. Get an input.
2. Process the input.
3. Produce an output.

| Inputs      | Process           | Output  |
| ------------|:-------------:| -----:|
| Hours worked, hourly pay rate |Multiply hours worked by hourly pay rate | Gross pay |

## 2.3 Displaying Output with the `print` Function

A _function_ is a piece of prewritten code that performs an operation.  Python has a built-in function `print`, which displays output on the screen.

```
    print('Hello world')
```

When you execute a function, you are _calling_ it.  You pass functions _arguments_, or data that is used in the function (e.g., 'Hello world').

#### Program 2-1

```
    print('Kate Austen')
    print('123 Full Circle Drive')
    print('Asheville, NC 28899')
```

### Strings and String Literals

A _string_ is referred to a sequence of characters.  When a string appears in the actual code, it is called a _string literal_.

String literals can be wrapped in either single-quotes (') or double-quotes (").

You can use single-quotes to enclose strings with double-quotes:

#### Program 2-4
```
    print('Your assignment is to read "Hamlet" by tomorrow.')
```

You can also enclose string literals in triple quotes (either """ or ''').  

Triple-quoted strings can contain both single quotes and double quotes as part of the string.

`print("""I'm reading "Hamlet" tonight.""")`

Triple quotes can also contain multi-line strings (single and double-quoted strings cannot).  Example:

```
    print("""One
    Two
    Three""")
```

## 2.4 Comments

Comments are short nodes, ignored by the interpreter, that explain the operations of the program.

In Python, you begin a comment with the # character.

An _end-line comment_ appears at the end of a line of code like so:

```
    print('Kate Austen')            # Display the name.
    print('123 Full Circle Drive')  # Display the address.
    print('Asheville, NC 28899')    # Display the city, state, and ZIP.
```

## 2.5 Variables

Programs use variables to access and manipulate data that is stored in memory.

A _variable_ is a name that represents a value in the computer's memory.

When a variable represents a value in the computer's memory, we say that the variable _references_ the value.

### Creating Variables with Assignment Statements

An _assignment statement_ is used to create a variable and make it reference a piece of data.

`age = 25`

An assignment statement is written as follows:

`variable = expression`

The equal sign (=) is known as the _assignment operator_.  

```
    width = 10
    length = 5
    
    print(width) # 10
    print(length) # 5
```

Common variable exceptions:

```
    temperature = 74.5
    
    print(tempereture) # NameError: name 'tempereture' is not defined

    print(Temperature) NameError: name 'Temperature' is not defined
```

### Variable Naming Rules

- Cannot use one of Python's key words
- Cannot contain spaces
- The first character must contain a letter or underscore
- After the first character, you can use numbers
- Variable names are case sensitive

To make variables more legible, you can separate words with spaces or use camelCase.

```
    gross_pay
    pay_rate
    hot_dogs_sold_today
```

The above style is popular among Python programmers; however, you can use camelCase, too:

```
    grossPay
    payRate
    hotDogsSoldToday
```

### Displaying Multiple Items with the `print` Function

Python allows us to display multiple items with one call to the 'print' function:

#### Program 2-9

```
    room = 503
    print('I am staying in room number', room)
```

### Variable Reassignment

When you reassign a variable to a different value, the old value will be removed from memory through _garbage collection_.

### Numeric Data Types and Literals

When an integer is stored in memory, it is classified as an `int`, and when a real number is stored in memory, it is classified as a `float`.

A number written into a program's code is called a _numeric literal_.  When a Python interpreter reads a numeric literal in a program's code, it determines its data type according to the following rules.

- A numeric literal written as a whole number is considered an `int` (e.g., 7, 1254, -9).
- A numeric literal that is written with a decimal point is considered a `float` (e.g., 1.5, 3.14159, 5.0).


It is important to be aware of a value's data type.  You can use the built-in `type` function to check a value's type:

```
    type(1) # <class 'int'>
    type(1.0) # <class 'float'>
```

### Storing Strings with the `str` Data Type

In addition to data types `int` and `float`, Python has a `str` type, which stores strings in memory.

### Reassigning a Variable to a Different Type

A variable in Python can refer to items of any type.  After a variable has been assigned an item of one type, it can be assigned to an item of a different type:

```
    x = 99
    print(x) # 99
    x = 'Take me to your leader'
    print(x) # Take me to your leader
```

## 2.6 Reading Input from the Keyboard

The `input` function reads a piece of data that has been entered at the keyboard and returns that piece of data, as a string, back to the program.  You use the function in the following format:

```
    variable = input(prompt)
```

Once the user is shown `prompt`, the value entered is stored in memory as `variable.`

```
    >>> name = input('What is your name?' )
    What is your name? Holly
    >>> print(name)
    Holly
```

Notice the space after "What is your name?"  This is because the `input` function does not automatically display a space after the prompt.

### Reading Numbers with the `input` Function

The `input` function always returns a string, even if numerical data is entered.  

Fortunately, Python has built-in functions to convert strings to integers and floating point numbers.

```
    >>> user_input = input('Give me a number:' )
    Give me a number: 10
    >>> the_int = int(user_input)
    >>> the_float = float(user_input)
    >>> type(user_input)
    <class 'str'>
    >>> type(the_int)
    <class 'int'>
    >>> type(the_float)
    <class 'float'>
```

You can use a _nested function_ call to immediately convert `user_input` to type `int` like so:

```
    >>> user_input = int(input('Give me a number: '))
    Give me a number: 5
    >>> type(user_input)
    <class 'int'>
```

The returned value from `input` is passed as an argument to `int` and the returned value of that is assigned to `user_input`.

The `int` and `float` functions only work correctly if they are passed an item with a discernable numeric value.  If the argument cannot be converted, an exception is thrown.

An _exception_ is an unexpected error that occurs while a program is running, causing the program to halt if the error is not properly dealt with.

## 2.7 Performing Calculations

_Math operators_ are used to perform calculations in programs.  A _math expression_ performs a calculation and gives a value (e.g., 2+2).

Here are some mathematical operators in Python:


| Symbol| Operation| Description|
|------------- |-------------|-----|
|+|Addition|Adds to numbers|
|-|Subtraction|Subtracts one number from another|
|*|Multiplication|Multiplies one number by another|
|/|Division|Divides one number by another and gives the result as a floating-point number (e.g., 5.5)|
|//|Integer division|Divides one number by another and gives the result as an integer (e.g., 5)|
|%|Remainder|Divides one number by another and gives the remainder|
|**|Exponent|Raises a number to a power|

The values on the left and right of the + operator are called _operands_:

```
>>> 12 + 2
14
```
### Floating Point and Integer Division

Python's `/` operator performs division and returns an integer:

```
    >>> 5 / 2
    2.5
```

Python's `//` operator performs division; however, it returns a floating-point number.

```
    >>> 5 // 2
    2
```

How the `//` operator works:
- If result is positive, it is truncated (fraction is omitted)
- If result is negative, it is rounded away from zero to the nearest integer.


```
    >>> -5 // 2
    -3
```

### Operator Precedence

Operations enclosed in parenthesis are performed first.  Then, when two operators share an operand, the operator with the higher _precedence_ is applied first.  The precedence of the math operators, from highest to lowest, are:
1. Exponentiation: **
2. Multiplication, division, and remainder: * / // %
3. Addition and subtraction: + -

If two operators with the same precedence share an operand, the operators execute from left to right.

```
    outcome = 12.0 + 6.0 / 3.0
```

In the above, division of 6 and 3 will take place first due to the established precedence rules.

### Grouping with Parentheses

To force some operations to go before others, use parentheses.

```
    result = (a + b) / 4
```

In the above, a is added to b before division occurs due to the presence of parentheses.

### The Exponent Operator

The purpose of the exponent operator is to raise a number to a power.

```
    >>> 4**2
    16
```

### The Remainder Operator

The % operator, or _modulus operator_ performs division and returns the remainder.

```
    leftover = 17 % 3
```

In the above, 2 is assigned to `leftover` variable.

### Converting Math Formulas to Programming Statements

In contrast to Math, programming languages, such as Python, must use operators.

### Mixed-Type Expressions and Data Type Conversion

Python rules regarding the evaluation of mathemeatical expressions:
- When an operation is performed on two `int` values, result is `int`
- When an operation is performed on two `float` values, result is `float`
- When an operation is performed on an `int` and `float`, the result will be `float`


```
    my_number = 5 * 2.0
```

In the above, 5 is converted to 5.0 and `my_number` is 10.0.

The above conversion is implicit; however, we can explicitly convert integers to floats and vice-versa.

```
    fvalue = 2.6
    ivalue = int(fvalue) # 2
```

```
    fvalue = -2.9
    ivalue = int(fvalue) # -2
```

### Breaking Long Statements into Multiple Lines

Sometimes statements are too long and we need to scroll horizontally.

Fortunately, Python allows you to break a statement into multiple lines by using the _line continuation character_ which is a backslash (\).

```
    print('We sold', units_sold \
        'for a total of', sales_amount)
```

## 2.8 More About Data Output

### Supressing the `print` Function's Ending Newline

By default, the `print` function prints a _newline character_.  You can prevent this behavior by passing the special argument `end=' '` to the function as shown below:

```
    print('One', end=' ')
    print('Two', end=' ')
    print('Three')
```

### Specifying an Item Separator

When multiple arguments are passed to `print`, they are automatically concatenated with a space.

```
    >>> print('One', 'Two')
    One Two
```

You can change how the arguments are separated:

```
    >>> print('One', 'Two', 'Three', sep='$')
    One$Two$Three
```

### Escape Characters

An _escape character_ is a special character that is preceded wit a backslash (\), appearing inside a string literal.

For example, `\n` is a newline escape character.  It causes the output to advance to the next line.

```
    >>> print('One\nTwo')
    One
    Two
```

### Displaying Multiple Items with the + Operator

You can use the + operator to perform _string concatenation_.

```
    >>> print('This is ' + 'one string.')
    This is one string.
```

### Formatting Numbers

```
    >>> print(5000.0 / 12.0)
    416.6666666666667
```

We can format this using the built-in `format` function.  You pass the function two arguments: a numeric value and a format specifier.  The _format specifier_ is a string that contains special characters specifiying how the numeric value should be formatted.

```
    >>> format(12345.6789, '.2f')
    '12345.68'
```

The format specifier is '.2f.'
    - The `.2` is the precision, or how many decimal places we want to round to.
    - The `f` specifies that the data type of the number we are formatting is floating-point.

The `format` function returns a string.

### Formatting in Scientific Notation

To display in scientific notation, use `E` or `e` instead of `f`.

```
    >>> print(format(12345.6789, 'e'))
    1.234568e+04
    >>> print(format(12345.6789, '.2e'))
    1.23e+04
```

### Inserting Comma Separators

```
    >>> print(format(12345.6789, ',.2f'))
    12,345.68
```

### Specifying a Minimum Field Width

You can set the minimum number of fields used to display a value using the `format` function.


```
    >>> print('The number is', format(12345.6789, '12,.2f'))
    The number is    12,345.68
```

Since the number is smaller than the number of minimum fields, there is visible white space on the left.

This is helpful for aligning numbers in columns.

### Formatting a Floating-Point Number as a Percentage

You can use `%` in place of `f` to create percentages.

```
    >>> print(format(0.5, '%'))
    50.000000%
    >>> print(format(0.5, '.0%'))
    50%
```

### Formatting Integers

You can also use the `format` function to format integers.  Instead of `f`, use `d`.  You cannot specify a precision when using integers.

```
    >>> print(format(123456, 'd')) # no formatting
    123456, 'd'
    >>> print(format(123456, ',d')) # include commas
    123,456
```

    

    















