# Chapter 3: Decision Structures and Boolean Logic

## 3.1 The `if` Statement

A *control structure* is a logical design that controls the order in which a set of statements execute.  A *sequence structure* is a set of statements that execute in the order that they appear.  A *decision structure* is a control structure that executes a set of statements only under certain conditions.  An action is *conditionally executed* if it is performed only when a certain condition is true. A *single alternative decision structure* provides only one alternative path of execution.


## Boolean Expressions and Relational Operators

Expressions tested by `if` statements are called *Boolean expressions.*  Typically, such expressions are formed with *relational operators* which determine if a specific relationship exists between two values.

The following table depicts the relational operators available in Python:


| **Operator** | **Meaning**              |
| ------------ | ------------------------ |
| >            | Greater than             |
| <            | Less than                |
| >=           | Greater than or equal to |
| <=           | Less than or equal to    |
| ==           | Equal to                 |
| !=           | Not equal to             |

Examples of Boolean expressions that compare variables `x` and `y`:


| **Expression** | **Meaning**                          |
| -------------- | ------------------------------------ |
| `x > y`        | Is `x` greater than `y`?             |
| `x < y`        | Is `x` less than `y`?                |
| `x >= y`       | Is `x` greater than or equal to `y`? |
| `x <= y`       | Is `x` less than or equal to `y`?    |
| `x == y`       | Is `x` equal to `y`?                 |
| `x != y`       | Is `x` not equal to `y`?             |

You can use the Python interpreter mode to experiment with these operators


    >>> x = 1 [ENTER]
    >>> y = 0 [ENTER]
    >>> x > y [ENTER]
    True

**The** `**>=**` **and** `**<=**` **Operators**
The `>=` operator determines whether the operand on its left is greater than *or* equal to the operand on its right.  The `<=` operator determines whether the operand on its left is less than *or* equal to the operand on its right.

**The** `**==**` **Operator**
The `==` operator determines whether the operand on its left is equal to the operand on its right.

**The** `**!=**` **Operator**
The `!=` operator is the not-equal-to operator.  It determines whether the operand on its left is not equal to the operand on its right, which is the opposite of the `==` operator.


## Putting It All Together
    if sales > 50000:
      bonus = 500.0

If `sales` is greater than `50000`, the variable bonus is assigned to `500.0`.


    if balance == 0:
      # Statements appearing here will
      # be executed only if the balance is
      # equal to 0.


    if choice != 5:
      # Statements appearing here will
      # be executed only if choice is
      # not equal to 5.


## 3.2 The `if-else` Statement

The `if-else` statement is a *dual alternative decision structure* which has two possible paths of execution—one path is taken if a condition is true, and the other path is taken if the condition is false.


    if condition:
      statement
      statement
      statement, etc
    else:
      statement
      statement
      statment, etc

**Indentation in the** `**if-else**` Statement
When you write an `if-else` statement, follow these guidelines for indentation:

- Make sure the `if` clause and the `else` clause are aligned.
- The `if` and the `else` clause are each followed by a block of statements.  Make sure the statements in the blocks are consistently indented.


## 3.2 Comparing Strings


    name1 = 'Mary'
    name2 = 'Mark'
    if name1 == name2:
      print('The names are the same.')
    else:
      print('The names are NOT the same.')

The `==` operator compares `name1` and `name2` to determine whether they are equal.  Because the strings ‘Mary’ and ‘Mark’ are not equal, the `else` clause will display the message: ‘The names are NOT the same.’

String comparisons are case sensitive.  For instance, the strings ‘saturday’ and ‘Saturday’ are not equal.

**Other String Comparisons**
In addition to determining whether strings are equal or not equal, you can also determine whether one string is greater than or less than another string.  

Recall that computers do not actually store characters, such as A, B, C, and so on, in memory.  Rather, they store numeric codes that represent the characters (from the ASCII character set).

Some facts pertaining to ASCII

- The uppercase characters A through Z are represented by the numbers 65 through 90.
- The lowercase characters a through z are represented by the numbers 97 through 122.
- When digits 0-9 are stored as characters, that are represented by numbers 48 through 57.
- A blank space is represented by the number 32.


    if 'a' < 'b':
      print('The letter a is less than the letter b')

The above code determines whether the ASCII code for the character ‘a’ is less than the code for letter ‘b.’

When you use relational operators to compare strings such as “Mary” and “Mark”, the strings are compared character-by-character. 

“Mary” is greater than “Mark” because the ASCII code for “y” is greater than the code for “k”, the strings are the same length, and the first three letters are the same.

If one of the strings in a comparison is shorter than the other, only the corresponding characters will be compared.  If the corresponding characters are identical, then the shorter string is considered less than the longer string.


## 3.4 Nested Decision Structures and the `if-elif-else` Statement

Follow these rules when writing nested `if` statements:

- Make sure each `else` clause is aligned with its matching `if` clause.
- Make sure the statements in each block are consistently indented. 

**The** `**if-elif-else**` **Statement**
Here is the general format:


    if condition_1:
       statement
       statement
       etc.
    elif condition_2:
      statement
      statement
      etc.
    else:
      statement
      statement
      etc.

If `condition_1` is true, the block of statements that immediately follow is executed, up to the `elif` clause.  The rest of the structure is ignored.  If `condition_1` is false, however, the program jumps to the very next `elif` clause and tests `condition_2`.  If it is true, the block of statements that immediately follow is executed, up to the next `elif` clause.  The rest of the structure is ignored.  This process continues until a condition is true, or no more `elif`s.  If no condition is true, block statements after the `else` clause are executed.


## 3.5 Logical Operators

The logical `and` operator and the logical `or` operator allow you to connect multiple Boolean expressions to create a compound expression.  The logical `not` operator reverses the truth of a Boolean expression.


| **Expression**     | **Meaning**                                       |
| ------------------ | ------------------------------------------------- |
| `x > y and a < b`  | Is `x` greater than `y` AND is `a` less than `b`? |
| `x == y or x == z` | Is `x` equal to `y` OR is `x` equal to `z`?       |
| `not (x > y)`      | Is the expression `x > y` NOT true?               |


**AND Operator**
The `and` operator takes two Boolean expressions as operands and creates a compound Boolean expression that is true only when both subexpressions are true.

**OR Operator**
The `or` operator takes two Boolean expressions as operands and creates a compound Boolean expression that is true when either of the subexpressions is true.

**Short-Circuit Evaluation**
Both the `and` and `or` operators perform *short-circuit evaluation*.  Essentially, the interpreter skips checking the remaining operands if it doesn’t need to.  For instance, if an operand on the left side of the `and` operator is false, the interpreter doesn’t even bother checking the boolean values of the remaining operators because it already has an answer.

**The** `**not**` **Operator**
The `not` operator is a unary (meaning it operates on one operand) operator that takes a Boolean expression as its operand and reverses its logical value.

**Checking Numeric Ranges with Logical Operators**
When determining whether a number is inside a range, it is best to use the `and` operator.  For example, the following `if` statement checks the value in `x` to determine whether it is inside the range of 20 through 40:


    if x >= 20 and x <= 40:
      print('In range of 20 and 40')

Use the `or` operator when checking if a number is outside of a range:


    if x < 20 or x > 40:
      print('Outside of range 20 and 40')


## 3.6 Boolean Variables

A boolean variable can reference one of two values: `True` or `False`.  Boolean variables are commonly used as flags, which indicate whether specific conditions exist.

In addition to `str`, `int`, and `float`, Python has a `bool` datatype that can either be `True` or `False`.



## 

