# Chapter 4: Repetition Structures

# 4.1 Introduction to Repetition Structures

A repetition structure causes a statement or set of statements to execute repeatedly.

Benefits of repetition structures:

- No duplicated code, therefore, smaller programs
- Saves time
- Easy to maintain

A *repetition structure* repeats code as many times as necessary.

## Condition-Controlled and Count-Controlled Loops

A *condition-controlled loop* uses a true/false condition to control the number of times that it repeats (e.g., `while` loops).

A *count-controlled* loop repeats a specified number of times (e.g., `for` loops).

# 4.2 The `while` Loop: A Condition-Controlled Loop

The `while` loop: do some task *while* a condition is *true*.

General format of a `while` loop in Python:


    while condition:
      statement
      statement
      etc.

The `condition` is evaluated as either true or false.  If true, statements that appear in the block are executed, and then the loop starts over.  If false, the program exists the loop.

Each execution of the body of a loop is known as an *iteration.*

## The `while` Loops is a Pretest Loop

A *pretest loop* evaluates the condition prior to executing.  While loops will not execute if the condition is `false` to begin with.

## Infinite Loops

Most of the time, loops must contain within themselves a way to terminate.  An *infinite loop* continues to repeat until the program is interrupted.  In most cases, this should be avoided.

# 4.3 The `for` Loop: A Count-Controlled Loop

The `for` statement is designed to work with a sequence of data items.  Here is the general format:


    for variable in [value1, value2, value3]:
      statement
      statement
      etc.

The `variable` is assigned the first value in the list, and then the statements that appear in the block are executed.  Then, `variable` is assigned the next value in the list, and the statements in the block are executed again.  This continues until `variable` has been assigned the last value in the list.

The variable used in a `for` statement is commonly referred to as a *target variable* because it is the target of an assignment at the beginning of each loop iteration.


## Using the `range` Function with the `for` Loop

The range function creates a type of object known as an iterable.  An *iterable* is an object, similar to a list, that contains a sequence of values that can be iterated over with something like a loop.  Here is an example:


    for num in range(5):
      print(num)

Here, range generates a sequence of numbers in the range of 0 up to (but not including) 5.  It’s the same as:


    for num in [0, 1, 2, 3, 4]:
      print(num)

If you pass one argument to `range`, that argument is used as the ending limit (amount of times the loop will iterate).  If you pass two arguments, the first is the starting value and the second is the ending value.


    for num in range(1, 5):
      print(num) # 1, 2, 3, 4

A third argument can be passed to `range`.  This argument is a *step value* because it changes how much the loop increments by.


    for num in range(1, 10, 2):
      print(num) # 1, 3, 5, 7, 9
## Letting the User Control the Loop Iterations

You can use the `input` function to allow the user to specify the start, end, and step of the `range` function.


## Generating an Iterable Sequence that Ranges from Highest to Lowest

You can also use `range` to generate sequences of numbers that go from highest to lowest:


    range(10, 0, -1) # 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1


# 4.4 Calculating a Running Total

A running total is a sum of numbers that accumulates with each iteration of a loop.  The variable used to keep the running total is called an *accumulator.*  The accumulator is declared outside of the loop and a statement within the loop appends a value to the accumulator.


    accumulator = 0
    for num in range(1, 3):
      accumulator += num
    
    print(accumulator) # 3
## Augmented Assignment Operators
| **Operator** | **Example Usage** | **Equivalent To** |
| ------------ | ----------------- | ----------------- |
| `+=`         | `x += 5`          | `x = x + 5`       |
| `-=`         | `x -= 2`          | `x = x - 2`       |
| `*=`         | `x *= 10`         | `x = x * 10`      |
| `/=`         | `a /= b`          | `a = a / b`       |
| `%=`         | `c %= 3`          | `c = c % 3`       |

# 4.5 Sentinels

A *sentinel* is a special value that marks the end of a sequence of values.  When a program reads the sentinel value, it knows it has reached the end of the sequence, so the loop terminates.  A sentinel must be distinctive enough that it will not be mistaken as a regular value in the sequence.


# 4.6 Input Validation Loops

Input validation is the process of inspecting data that has been input to a program, to make sure it is valid before it is used in a computation.  We have to instruct the computer on what bad data is.

A programmer should design their programs in such a way that bad input is never accepted.

A *priming read* is when input is acquired before the loop to be tested.


    score = int(input('Enter test score: '))
    
    while score < 0 or score > 100:
      print('Error: score cannot be negative')
      score = int(input('Enter test score: '))

The above loop will continue to iterate until a test score between 1 and 100 is provided.

# 4.7 Nested Loops

A loop that is inside another loop is *nested.*

An example would be a clock:

    for hours in range(24):
      for minutes in range(60):
        for seconds in range(60):
          print(hours, minutes, seconds, sep=':')

Things to know about nested loops:

- An inner loop goes through all of its iterations for every single iteration of an outer loop.
- Inner loops complete their iterations faster than outer loops.
- To get the total number of iterations of a nested loop, multiply the number of iterations of all the loops.




