# Chapter 5: Functions

# 5.1 Introduction to Functions

A function is a group of statements that exist within a program for the purpose of performing a specific task.  

Instead of writing a large program as one long sequence of statements, it can be written as several small functions, each one performing a specific part of the task.  This is known as the *divide and conquer* approach because a large task is divided into several smaller tasks that are easily performed.

*Modularized programs* are written with each task in its own function.

## Benefits of Modularizing a Program with Functions
- *Simpler code:* Small functions are easier to read than long sequences of statements.
- *Code reuse:* You write a function once and reuse it each time you need to perform the task.
- *Better testing:* Each function can be individually unit tested.
- *Faster development:* Functions can be written once for a common task and be imported into a program that needs them.
- *Easier facilitation of teamwork:* Different programs write different functions, or pieces of the program.
## Void Functions and Value-Returning Functions

Two types of functions:

- *Void function:* Executes statements and terminates, returning no value.
- *Value-returning function:* Executes statements and returns a value back to the statement that called it.
# 5.2 Defining and Calling a Void Function
## Function Names

Function names conform to the same rules as those pertaining to variable names:

- No key words
- Cannot contain spaces
- First character must be a-z, A-Z or an underscore
- After the first character, you may use letters, digits, or underscores.
- Uppercase and lowercase character are distinct

Since functions perform actions, programmers prefer to use verbs in function names.  For example, a function that calculates gross pay might be named `calculate_gross_pay`.

## Defining and Calling a Function

General format of a function in Python:


    def function_name():
      statement
      statement
      etc.

The first line is known as the *header*.  It marks the beginning of a function definition.  The function header begins with the key word `def`, followed by the name of the function, followed by a set of parentheses, followed by a colon.

The statements are known as a *block.*  A block is simply a set of statements that belong to a group.

**Defining a Function**


    def message():
      print('I am Arthur')
      print('King of the Britons.')

**Calling a Function**

To execute a function, you must call it.


    message()

When a function is executed, the interpreter jumps to that function and executes all the statements within the block.  After, the interpreter jumps back out.

It is common for a program to have a `main` function that is called when the program starts.  The main function then calls other functions in the program as they are needed.  It is often said the `main` function contains the program’s *mainline logic*, which is the overall logic of the program.

# 5.3 Designing a Program to Use Functions
## Flowcharting a Program with Functions

In a flowchart, a function call is shown with a rectangle that has vertical bars at each side.  The name of the function that is being called is written on the symbol.  Programmers typically draw a separate flowchart for each function in a program.

## Top-Down Design

The process of top-down design is performed in the following manner:

- The overall task that the program is to perform is broken down into a series of subtasks.
- Each of the subtasks is examined to determine whether it can be further broken down into more subtasks.  This is repeated until no more subtasks can be identified.
- Once all of the subtasks have been identified, they are written in code.

This is called top-down design because the programmer begins by looking at the topmost level of tasks that must be performed and then breaks down those tasks into lower levels of subtasks.

## Hierarchy Charts

A *hierarchy chart* shows boxes that represent each function in a program.  It provides a visual representation of the relationship between functions.

## Pausing Execution Until the User Presses Enter

In Python, you can use the `input` function to display a message and defer execution until the user presses enter.

# 5.4 Local Variables

A local variable is created inside a function and cannot be accessed by statements that are outside the function.

## Scope and Local Variables

*Scope* is the part of the program in which the variable may be accessed.  A variable is only available to statements in the variable’s scope.  A local variable’s scope is the function in which the variable is created.

Also, a local variable cannot be accessed prior to creation:

    def bad_function():
      print('Hello', name)
      name = 'Matt'
# 5.5 Passing Arguments to Functions

An argument is any piece of data that is passed into a function when the function is called.  A parameter is a variable that receives an argument that is passed into a function.

A *parameter variable*, often simply called a *parameter*, is a special variable that is assigned the value of an argument when a function is called.

Here is an example of a function that has a parameter value:


    def show_double(number):
      result = number * 2
      print(result)
## Parameter Variable Scope

 A parameter variable’s scope is the function in which the parameter is used.

## Passing Multiple Arguments

You can pass more than one argument to a function:


    def sum(num1, num2):
      return num1 + num2
    
    print(sum(2, 2)) # 4

The `num1, num2` is referred to a *parameter list.*  Notice that the first argument is passed to the first parameter variable, and the second argument is passed to the second parameter variable.

## Making Changes to Parameters

When an argument is passed to a function in Python, the function parameter variable will reference the argument’s value.  However, **any changes that are made to the parameter variable will not affect the argument.**   This is known as *pass by value.*  In other words, a function cannot change the value of the argument that was passed to it.  Here is an example:


    def main():
            value = 99
            print('The value is', value) # 99
            change_me(value)
            print('Back in main the value is', value) # 99
    
    def change_me(arg):
            print('I am changing the value.')
            arg = 0
            print('The value is now', arg) # 0
## Keyword Arguments

Python allows you to write an argument in the following format, to specify which parameter variable the argument should be passed to:


    parameter_name=value

**Mixing Keyword Arguments with Positional Arguments**
When using keyword arguments with positional arguments, the positional arguments must appear first.  For instance:


    show_interest(10000.0, rate=0.1, periods=10)
# 5.6 Global Variables and Global Constants

A global variable is accessible to all the functions in a program file.  An example:


    my_value = 10
    
    def show_value():
            print(my_value) # 10
    
    show_value()

An additional step is needed if you want to assign a value to a global from a function:


    number = 0
    
    def main():
            global number # we intend to assign a value to this global
            number = int(input('Enter a number: '))
            show_number()
    
    def show_number():
            print('The number is', number)
    
    main()

Reasons to not use globals:

- Difficult debugging
- Functions that use globals are usually dependent on those variables, therefore, it is difficult to reuse in a different program
- Globals make a program hard to understand

In most cases, **you should create variables locally and pass them as arguments to functions that need them.**

## Global Constants

A *global constant* is a global name that references a value that cannot be changed.  Because global constants can’t be changed, you don’t have to worry about many of the potential hazards that are associated with the use of global variables.

It is common for global constants to be written in all uppercase letters:


    CONTRIBUTION_RATE = 0.05
# 5.7 Introduction to Value-Returning Functions: Generating Random Number

A value-returning function is a function that returns a value back to the part of the program that called it.  Python, as well as most other programming languages, provides a library of prewritten functions that perform commonly needed tasks.  These libraries typically contain a function that generates random random.

A *value-returning function* is a special type of function.  It is similar to void functions in the following ways:

- A group of statements that perform a specific task.
- When you want to execute the function, you call it.

When a value-returning function finishes, however, it returns a value back to the part of the program that called it.

## Standard Library Functions and the `import` Statement

Python has a library of functions that are organized into individual modules.  In order to use such functions, you must use the `import` statement.  The `import` statement tells the interpreter the name of the file you would like to import.  

For example, if you want to use any of the math module’s functions, you write:


    import math

This makes all of the functions within the `math` module available to the program.  Because you cannot see the internal workings of library functions, they are known as *black boxes*.  In other words, you provide the function an input and it spits out an output, however, you don’t know how it did so.

## Generating Random Numbers

Python has several library functions for working with random numbers, and they are stored in a module named `random`.


    import random

To access functions from the module, you use *dot notation*.  An example:


    number = random.randint(1, 100) # Random integer between 1-100

`Randint` is a value-returning function because it returns a value, which will be assigned to `number`.

## Experimenting with Random Numbers in Interactive Mode

To understand how the `randint` function works with different arguments, use it in interactive mode.


    >>> import random
    >>> random.randint(1, 10)
    5
    >>> random.randint(1, 100)
    44
    >>> random.randint(100, 200)
    189


## The `randrange`, `random`, and `uniform` Functions

`randrange` is just like `range`, except it doesn’t return a list of values within a range, rather a number within the range:


    random.randrange(10) # random integer between 0-9
    random.randrange(5, 10) # random integer between 5-9
    random.randrange(0, 101, 10) # random integer from [0,10,20,30,40,50,60,70,80,90,100]

The `random` function returns a floating point number between 0.0 and 1.0. 


    random.random() #0.3

The `uniform` function works just like `random`, however, you get to choose the range of values.


    random.uniform(1, 100.0) # random float between 1-100
## Random Number Seeds

The numbers generated by the `random` module aren’t truly random, rather they are *pseudo-random numbers.*  Internally, upon importing the module, `random` uses a seed value (the system’s current time) and uses that to generate the numbers.  Since that one seed is used for all the function calls within the program, they are all being generated using the same seed.  

You can specify a seed value using the `seed` function.  Notice how the same seed always generate the same random numbers.


    # foo.py
    import random
    random.seed(10)
    random.randint(1, 100) ## 58
    random.randint(1, 100) ## 43


    # bar.py
    import random
    random.seed(10)
    random.randint(1, 100) ## 58
    random.randint(1, 100) ## 43


# 5.8 Writing Your Own Value-Returning Functions

A value-returning function has a return statement that returns a value back to the part of the program that called it.


    def value_returning_function():
      statement
      statement
      etc.
      return expression

Here, `expression` will be sent back to the variable that is assigned to this function call.


    def sum(a, b):
      return a + b
    
    the_sum = sum(2, 2)
    
    print(the_sum) # 4
## Using IPO Charts

IPO stands for *input, processing, and output,* and an *IPO Chart* describes the input, processing, and output of a function.

The following is an IPO chart for this function:


    def get_regular_price():
      price = float(input('Enter the item\'s regular price: '))
      return price
| **Input** | **Processing**                                    | **Output**               |
| --------- | ------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------ |
| None      | Prompts the user to enter an item’s regular price | The item’s regular price |

The decision of whether using an IPO chart, flowchart, or both is often left to personal preference.

## Returning Strings

Functions can be used to return string input from users.


    def get_name():
      return input('Name: ')
## Returning Boolean Values

*Boolean functions* return `True` or `False`.


    def is_even(number):
      if (number % 2) == 0:
        status = True
      else:
        status = False
      return status
      
    user_input = int(input('Enter a number: '))
    
    if is_even(user_input):
      print('Even number')
    else:
      print('Odd number')

**Using Boolean Functions in Validation Code**

You can use Boolean functions to validate complex input validations.


    model = int(input('Enter valid model number: '))
    
    while is_invalid(model):
      print('Invalid model number.')
      model = int(input('Enter valid model number: '))
## Returning Multiple Values

You can return have a function return multiple values with the following format:


    return expression1, expression2, etc.

Here is a function that does so:


    def get_full_name():
      first = input('First name: ')
      last = input('Last name: ')
      
      return first, last
      
    first_name, last_name = get_full_name()


# 5.9 The `math` Module

Python’s `math` module contains numerous functions that can be used in mathematical calculations.


## `math.pi` and `math.e` Values

The `math` module defines two variables, `pi` and `e`, which are assigned mathematical values for *pi* and *e*.

# 5.10 Storing Functions in Modules

A *module* is a file that contains Python code.  Large programs are easier to debug and maintain when they are divided into modules.  The process of breaking up programs into individual files, or modules, is called *modularization*. 

When creating modules:

- Filenames must end in `.py`
- Filenames cannot be Python reserved words (e.g., for)

You import your modules using:

    import <module_name>
## Menu-Driven Programs

A *menu-driven program* displays a list of the operations on the screen, and allows the user to select the operation that he or she wants the program to perform.  The list of options displayed on the screen is called a *menu*.  

