# Chapter 6: Files and Exceptions

# 6.1 Introduction to File Input and Output

When a program needs to save data for later use, it writes the data in a file.  The data can be read from the file at a later time.

When data is written to a file, it is copied from a variable in RAM to the file.  When data is read from a file, it is copied from the file into RAM and referenced by a variable.

Three steps taken when a file is used by a program:

1. *Open the file:* Opening an output file allows the program to write to it.  Opening an input file allows the program to read from it.
2. *Process the file:* Data is either written or read from the file.
3. *Close the file:* When processing is complete, the file must be closed.  


## Types of Files

Programming languages usually provide both *sequential* and *direct* access:

- *Sequential:* All preceding data must be read before you read sequential data.
- *Direct:* Any piece of data in the file can be read without reading data that comes before it.
## Filenames and File Objects

Files contain extensions which describe the data that lie within (e.g., .docx, .txt, etc.).  In order for a program to work with a file on the computer’s disk, it must create a file object in memory.  Such an object allows the program to work with the file.  In a program, a variable references the file object, which is used by the program to carry out operations.

## Opening a File

To open a file in Python, use the `open()` function:


    file_variable = open(filename, mode)

In the above, `file_variable` is the variable that references the file object.  The `filename` is the name of the file and `mode` specifies the mode (reading, writing, etc.).

Here are a few modes:


| **Mode** | **Description**                                                                                                  |
| -------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| r        | Read only.                                                                                                       |
| w        | Write to the file.  If file exists, erase contents.  Else, create the file.                                      |
| a        | Write to the file.  All data written to the file will be appended to its end.  If file doesn’t exist, create it. |

    open('customers.txt', 'r') # Read from a text file
    open('sales.txt', 'w') # Create a new txt file and write data to it
## Specifying the Location of a File

To open a file in a different location, specify a path.  If the path is a string literal, prefix it with `r`, which means *raw string*.  Python does not interpret escaped characters in raw strings.

## Writing Data to a File

File objects have a method `write` that can be used to write data to a file.


    file_variable.write(string)

After writing to a file, it should be closed.  This is so unsaved data that is in a buffer (in memory) can be written to the file.


    file_variable.close()


## Reading Data from a File

If you opened a file using `r` mode, you can read from it using the `read()` method.


    file_variable.read()

Don’t forget to close after reading the file.


    file_variable.close()

To read a line of a file, use `readline()`


    file_variable.readline()
    file_variable.close()


## Concatenating a Newline to a String

When a program writes data that has been entered by the user to a file, it is usually necessary to concatenate a `\n` escape sequence to the data before writing it, which ensures the data is on a new line.

## Reading a String and Stripping the Newline from It

Strings have a `rstrip()` method used to strip specific characters from the end of a string.


    name = 'John\n'
    name = name.rstrip('\n')


## Appending Data to an Existing File

Use the `a` mode to open an output file in *append mode* which means:

- If the file exists, it will **not** be erased.  If the file does not exists, it will be created.
- When data is written, it is written at the end of the file.


## Writing and Reading Numeric Data

Numbers need to be converted to string in order to be written to a file.  Simply use the `str()` method to convert a number to a string.


    outfile.write(str(55) + '\n')

To read the numbers from a file, simply convert each line to an integer using `int()`.


    num = int(infile.readline())


# 6.2 Using Loops to Process Files
## Reading a File with a Loop and Detecting the End of the File

To determine the end of a file, check to see if `readline()` returns an empty string.


    # Open a file
    infile = open('file.txt', 'r')
    
    # Check first line before
    # entering loop to see if it
    # is empty
    line = infile.readline()
    
    while line != '':
      # Do processing
      
      # Read next line
      line = infile.readline()


## Using Python’s `for` Loop to Read Lines

A `for` loop can be used to read the contents from a file without being told when to stop.


    for variable in file_object:
      statement
      statement
      etc.

Here, `variable` will reference a line within a file.

# 6.3 Processing Records

The data that is stored in a file is frequently organized in records.  A record is a complete set of data about an item, and a field is an individual piece of data within a record.

## Modifying Records

To modify a record in a sequential file, you must create a second temporary file.  You copy all of the original file’s records to the temporary file, but when you get to the record that is to be modified, you do not write its old contents to the temporary file.  Instead, you write its new modified values to the temporary file.  Then, you finish copying any remaining records from the original file to the temporary file.

The temporary file then takes place of the original file.  You delete the original file and rename the temporary file.

To rename and remove files, you must import the `os` module.


    from os import remove, rename
    remove('original.txt')
    rename('temp.txt', 'original.txt')
## Deleting Records

To delete records from a sequential file, you must create a temporary file.  You copy all of the original records to the temporary file except for the one that should be deleted. The temporary file then takes place of the original.

# 6.4 Exceptions

An *exception* is an error that occurs while a program is running, causing the program to abruptly halt.  They can be handled using a `try/except` statement.

For instance, dividing by 0 raises the following exception:


    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "20.py", line 13, in <module>
        main()
      File "20.py", line 9, in main
        result = num1 / num2
    ZeroDivisionError: division by zero

One way to handle raised exceptions is an `if` statement:


    num1 = 5
    num2 = 0
    
    if num2 != 0:
            result = num1 / num2
            print(num1, 'divided by', num2, 'is', result)
    else:
            print('Cannot divide by 0.')

Some exceptions cannot be avoided, though.  For instance, an exception is raised if you try to convert a string (e.g., ‘forty’) to an integer:


    hours = int(input('How many hours did you work? '))
    ValueError: invalid literal for int() with base 10: 'forty'

A better way of handling exceptions is using an *exception handler*: 


    try:
      statement
      statement
      etc.
    except ExceptionName:
      statement
      statement
      etc.

The code block in `try` is called the *try suite*.  Statements within it have the potential of raising an exception.  After, the *except clause* begins.  The `ExceptionName` is optional.

When the `try/except` statement executes, the statements in the try suite begin to execute.  The following happens next:

- If a statement within the try suit raises an exception specified by the `ExceptionName` in an except clause, the appropriate except clause executes and control is transferred to statements below the `try/except` statement.
- If a statement in the try suite raises an exception that is **not** specified by `ExceptionName` in an except clause, the program halts with a traceback error message.
- If no statements in the `try/except` statement raise exceptions, the subsequent except clauses are skipped and control is transferred to statements below the `try/catch` statement.
## Handling Multiple Exceptions

Sometimes code within the try suite has the potential of throwing many types of exceptions.  For example, consider the following code that tries to read from a `sales_data.txt` file:


    
    total = 0.0
    
    filename = 'sales_data.txt'
    
    try:
      infile = open(filename, 'r')
    
      for line in infile:
              amount = float(line)
              total += amount
    
      infile.close()
    
      print('Total:', format(total, ',.2f'))
    
    except IOError:
            print(f'Failed to read file {filename}.')
    except ValueError:
            print(f'Non-numeric data found in file {filename}.')
    except:
            print('An error occurred.')

Notice the multiple `except` clauses.

## Using One `except` Clause to Catch All Exceptions

To catch all exceptions, simply omit the `ExceptionName` like so:


    try:
      # code that can raise an exception...
    except:
      print('Something went wrong.') # Generic exception clause


## Displaying an Exception’s Default Error Message

When an exception is thrown, an object known as an *exception object* is created in memory.  The object contains a default error message.  You can optionally assign the the exception object to a variable like so and print it:


    except ValueError as err:
      print(err)

If you want to use just one except clause, but access the exception object, you can specify `Exception` as the type:


    except Exception as err:
      print(err)


## The `else` Clause

You can add an optional `else` clause after the except clauses.  The statements within the `else` clause are executed only if no exceptions were raised.


    try:
     statement
     statement
     etc.
    except:
      statement
      statement
      etc.
    else:
      statement
      statement
      etc. 


## The `finally` Clause

You can add an optional `finally` clause after the except clause.  The statements within the `finally` clause are executed whether an exception is raised or not.  This is commonly used for cleanup (e.g., closing a file, etc.)


    try:
     statement
     statement
     etc.
    except:
      statement
      statement
      etc.
    finally:
      statement
      statement
      etc. 

