# Chapter 7: Lists and Tuples

# 7.1 Sequences

A *sequence* is an object that holds multiple items of data, stored one after the other.  You can perform operations on a sequence to examine and manipulate the contents within.

Lists and Tuples are two types of sequence objects in Python.  The difference is simple:  a tuple is immutable, which means that once it is created, the contents cannot change.

# 7.2 Introduction to Lists

A *list* is an object that contains multiple data items and is mutable.  Items can be manipulated by way of indexing, slicing, etc.

Here is a simple examples of *elements* in a list:


    even_numbers = [2, 4, 6, 8, 10]

Lists can store multiple data types:


    info = ['Matt', 21, 15000.00]

Python has a built-in `list` function that can convert certain types of objects to lists.  For instance, you can convert the iterable returned by `range` like so:


    my_list = list(range(1, 5))
## The Repetition Operator

The *repetition operator* makes multiple copies of a list and joins them all together.  An example:

    >>> numbers = [0] * 5
    >>> print(numbers)
    >>> [0, 0, 0, 0, 0]
## Iterating over a List with the `for` Loop

You can iterate over a list using the `for` loop.  Here is an example:


    numbers = [99, 100, 101, 102]
    for n in numbers:
      print(n)

The above produces the following output:

    99
    100
    101
    102
## Indexing

You can access individual items in a list with an *index.*  The index value starts at 0, goes to 1, and so on.


    my_list = [25, 50, 75]
    print(my_list[0], my_list[1], my_list[2]) # 25, 50, 75

You can use negative indices to refer to an element’s position relative to the end of a list.  


    my_list = [3, 5, 7, 9]
    print(my_list[-1], my_list[-2], my_list[-3], my_list[-4]) # 9, 7, 5, 3

An `IndexError` exception is raised when you use an invalid index.

## The `len` Function

`len` returns the length of a sequence, such as a list.  An example:


    my_list = [5, 6, 7, 8]
    print(len(my_list)) # 4
## Lists are Mutable

Lists are *mutable,* meaning their elements can be changed.  For instance, you can assign an index value to an element like so:


    my_list = [55, 89]
    my_list[1] = 90
    print(my_list) # 55, 90

When doing the above, you must use a valid index for an existing element or an `IndexError` exception will occur.


    my_list = [9, 8]
    my_list[2] = 6 # Exception!

If you want to fill a list by way of an index value, you must create the list with the desired size.


    numbers = [0] * 5 # A list that holds 5 items
    
    index = 0
    while index < len(numbers):
      numbers[index] = 100 + index
      index += 1
    
## Concatenating Lists

Concatenate two lists with the `+` operator:


    [1, 3, 5] + [7, 9, 11]

You can also concatenate one list to another using the `+=` operator:


    list1 = [1, 3, 5]
    list2 = [7, 9, 11]
    list1 += list2


# 7.3 List Slicing

A slicing expression selects a range of elements from a sequence.  A *slice* is a span of items that are taken from a sequence.

To get a slice, you use the following format:


    list_name[start : end]

In general, *start* is the index of the first element in the slice, and *end* is the index marking the end of the slice.  The expression returns a list containing a copy of the elements from *start* up to (but not including) *end.* 

For instance, say we have this list:


    days = ['Sunday', 'Monday', 'Tuesday', 'Wednesday', 'Thursday', 'Friday', 'Saturday']

To get Tuesday-Thursday, we can do this:


    mid_days = [2:5] # ['Tuesday', 'Wednesday', 'Thursday']

If you leave out the *start* index in a slicing expression, Python uses 0 as the starting index.


    nums = [5, 10, 15, 20, 25]
    print(nums[:3]) # [5, 10, 15]

If you leave out the *end* index in a slicing expression, Python uses the length of the list minus one as the ending index.


    nums = [10, 20, 30, 45, 67]
    print(nums[1:]) # [20, 30, 45, 67]

If you leave out both the *start* and *end*, you get a copy of a list.


    nums = [9, 5, 6, 2]
    print(nums[:]) [9, 5, 6, 2]

You can also include a *step value* in a slice.


    my_list = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
    print(numbers[1:8:2]) # [2, 4, 6, 8]

You can also use negative index values in slicing expressions.


    my_list = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
    print(numbers[-6:]) # [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]

Invalid indices don’t cause exceptions.

- If the *end* index specifies a position beyond the end of the list, Python will use the length of the list instead.
- If the *start* index specifies a position before the beginning of the list, Python will use 0 instead.
- If the *start* index is greater than the *end* index, the slicing expression will return an empty list.
# 7.4 Finding Items in Lists with the `in` Operator

You can use the `in` operator to determine whether an item is contained in a list.


    item in list

The above expression returns `True` if `item` is an element in `list`, otherwise, `False`.

# 7.5 List Methods and Useful Built-in Functions

Lists have methods to allow you to add and remove elements, change the order of elements, etc.

## The `append` Method
    append(item)

Adds an element to the end of a list.

## The `index` Method
    index(item)

Returns the index of the first element whose value is equal to the argument provided.  If the item is not found, a *ValueError* exception is raised.

## The `insert` Method
    insert(index, item) 

Inserts `item` into the list at the specified `index`.  When an item is inserted into a list, the list expands in size to accommodate.  The item that was previously at the specified index, and all the items after it, are shifted by one position toward the end of the list.  No exceptions will occur if you specify an invalid index.  If you specify an index beyond the end of the list, the item will be added to the end of the list.  If you use a negative index that specifies an invalid position, the item will be inserted at the beginning of the list.

## The `sort` Method
    nums = [3,2,1]
    nums.sort()
    print(nums) # [1, 2, 3]
    
    strs = ['charlie', 'alpha', 'bravo']
    strs.sort()
    print(strs) # ['alpha', 'bravo', 'charlie']

Sorts the items in the list so they appear in ascending order.

## The `remove` Method
    remove(item)

Removes the first occurrence of item from the list.  A *ValueError* exception is raised if item is not found in the list.

## The `reverse` Method
    nums = [5, 6, 7]
    nums.reverse()
    print(nums) # [7, 6, 5]

Reverses the order of items in the list.

## The `del` Statement

Use the `del` statement to remove an item at a specific index.


    my_list = [1, 3, 5]
    del my_list[0]
    print(my_list) [3, 5]


## The `min` and `max` Functions

`min` accepts a list as an argument and returns the item that has the lowest value in the sequence.


    print(min([66, 102, 4, 815])) # 4

`max` is just like `min`, however, it returns the item that has the *highest* value in the sequence.


    print(max(['bravo', 'zulu', 'alpha'])) # 'zulu'
# 7.6 Copying Lists

To make a copy of a list, you must copy the list’s elements.  

Simply assigning one variable an existing list doesn’t copy it.  It merely provides the variable a reference to the list:


    list1 = [1, 2, 3, 4]
    lis2 = list1
    list1.remove(2)
    print(list1) # [1, 3, 4]
    print(list2) # [1, 3, 4]

As demonstrated above, removing an item from the list affects both variables.

You can make a shallow copy of a list by omitting the *start* and *end* operands in a slice like so:

    list1 = [6, 7, 8]
    list2 = list1[:] # shallow copy of list1
    list1.remove(8)
    print(list2) # [6, 7, 8] (not affected by removal)

Or you can copy a list with a loop:


    list1 = [1, 2, 3, 4]
    list2 = []
    for item in list1:
      list2.append(item)
# 7.7 Processing Lists
## Working with Lists and Files

Saving the contents of a list to a file is easy.  Python file objects have a method named `writelines` that writes an entire list to a file.


    outfile = open('cities.txt', 'w')
    outfile.writelines(['Chicago', 'Dallas', 'New York'])
    outfile.close()

To add a new line after each element, use a for-loop instead of `writelines`:


    for city in cities:
      outfile.write(city + '\n')

File objects in Python have a method named `readlines` that returns a file’s contents as a list of strings.  Each line in the file will be an item in the list.  The items in the list will include their terminating newline character, which in many cases will need to be stripped.


    # removing terminating new line character
    index = 0
    while index < len(cities):
      cities[index] = cities[index].rstrip('\n')
      index += 1
# 7.8 Two-Dimensional Lists

A *two-dimensional list* is a list that has other lists as its elements.


    teams = [['Joe', 'Cameron'], ['Matt', 'Ian']]

Lists of lists are also known as *nested lists*.  The lists within a list are thought of as rows, and each of the elements within as columns.


    scores = [[55, 67, 13], [99, 43, 27], [50, 100, 75]]
    print(scores[0][0]) # 55
    print(scores[1][1]) # 43
    print(scores[2][2]) # 75
# 7.9 Tuples

A *tuple* is an **immutable** sequence, which means its contents **cannot change**.

An example of a tuple:


    my_tuple = ('Matt', 21, 50000.00)

Tuples support all the same operations as lists (excluding those that change contents).  Tuples support the following:

- Subscript indexing (retrieval only)
- Methods such as `index`
- Built-in functions such as `len`, `min`, and `max`
- Slicing expressions
- The `in` operator
- The `+` and `*` operators

Tuples **do not support** methods like `append, remove, insert, reverse, sort`.

## What’s the Point?

One reason tuples exist is performance.  Processing a tuple is **faster than** processing a list, so tuples are good for processing large data sets.  Another reason is that the contents of a tuple are safe since the sequence is **immutable**.

## Converting Between Lists and Tuples

You can use the built-in `list` function to convert a tuple to a list and the built-in `tuple()` function to convert a list to a tuple.


    number_tuple = (5, 10, 15)
    number_list = list(number_tuple)
    
    str_list = ['hello', 'world']
    str_tuple = tuple(str_list)


