# Chapter 10: Classes and Object-3 Oriented Programming

# 10.1 Procedural and Object-Oriented Programming

*Procedural programming* is a method of writing software.  It is a programming practice centered on the procedures or actions that take place in a program.  *Object-oriented programming* is centered on objects.  Objects are created from abstract data types that encapsulate data and functions together.

Procedural code involves several functions that perform specific tasks and gather input from the user, perform calculations, reading or writing files, displaying output, and so on.  Typically, procedures operate on data items that are separate from the procedures.

As programs become more complex, the separation of data and the methods that manipulate the data can cause problems.

Object-oriented programming (OOP) is centered on creating *objects,* which are entities that contain both data and procedures.  Data contained in the object are known as *attributes*.  The procedures that an object performs are known as *methods.*  An object’s methods perform operations on the data attributes.

OOP addresses the problem of code and data separation through encapsulation and data hiding.  *Encapsulation* refers to the combining of data and code into a single object.  *Data hiding* is an object’s ability to hide its data attributes from code that is outside the object.  Data hiding prevents accidental corruption.  

## Object Reusability

OOP encourages the reuse of objects since they are not stand-alone programs.  

## An Everyday Example of an Object

Consider an alarm clock.  It would have the following attributes:

- current_second
- current_minute
- current_hour
- alarm_time
- alarm_is_set

Such attributes are values that define the object’s *state.*  They are manipulated with the following methods:

- set_time
- set_alarm_time
- set_alarm_on
- set_alarm_of

These methods would be available to be used outside of the object, therefore, they are considered *public methods.*

The object may also have methods for internal use.  Such methods are known as *private methods.*  For instance, the alarm clock may have the following methods for internal use:

- increment_current_second
- increment_current_minute
- increment_current_hour
- sound_alarm

The above “increment” methods would update the state. For instance, `increment_current_second` would be called every 1000 milliseconds to add 1 to the `current_second` attribute.

# 10.2 Classes

A class is code that specifies the data attributes and methods for a particular type of object.  Think of a class as a “blueprint” that must be created prior to the creation of objects.  Essentially, classes are predetermined descriptions of objects.  When the class is used to create an object, it is known as an *instantiation.* 

## Class Definitions

Classes are created through a *class definition,* which is a set of statements that define a class’s methods and data attributes.


    import random
    
    class Coin:
    
            def __init__(self):
                    self.sideup = 'Heads'
    
            def toss(self):
                    if random.randint(0, 1) == 0:
                            self.sideup = 'Heads'
                    else:
                            self.sideup = 'Tails'
    
            def get_sideup(self):
                    return self.sideup

The `__init__` method is the class’s initializer method, which initializes the object with instance data.  It is called when a new object is instantiated from the `Coin` class.  

In the above class, each method is provided the parameter named `self`.  It is required in every method of a class.  It refers to the current instance of the `Coin` class.

To instantiate an instance:

    my_coin = Coin()

Here, `my_coin` now points to a reference of an object that is an instance of `Coin`.

## Hiding Attributes

Data attributes of a class should be inaccessible from outside of the class.  Rather, there should be methods that safely mutate the data.  For instance, since `sideup` is public in the above `Coin` class, it can be directly modified without using the `toss` method:


    my_coin = Coin()
    my_coin.sideup = 'Heads'

In Python you can hide an attribute by starting its name with two underscore characters.  If we change the name of the  `sideup` attribute to `__sideup`, then the code outside cannot modify the attribute directly.

## Storing Classes in Modules

As programs use more classes, the need to organize classes becomes greater.  Programmers commonly organize their class definitions by storing them in modules.  For instance, we can store the aforementioned `Coin` class in a `coin.py` file and `import` it into our program.

## The `__str__` method

Displaying an object’s state is a common task.  It is so common that many programmers equip their classes with a method that returns a string containing the object’s state.  In Python, you give this method the special name `__str__`.

The following is a `__str__` method for a `BankAccount` class.


    def __str__(self):
      return 'Your account balance is $' + 
      format(savings.get_balance(), ',.2f')

You do not directly call the `__str__` method.  Instead, it is called when the object is passed to the `print` function:


    my_acount = BankAccount()
    
    print(my_account)

The `__str__` method is also called when an object is passed to the `str` function:

# 10.3 Working with Instances

Each instance of a class has its own set of data attributes.  Consider the following:


    class Person:
      def __init__(self, name):
        self.name = name
    
    bob = Person('bob')
    print(bob.name) # 'bob'
    
    charlie = Person('charlie')
    print(bob.name) # 'charlie'

Notice how the value of `name` is different for each instance.


## Accessor and Mutator Methods

*Accessor methods,* or *getters,* return the value from a class without mutating it (e.g., get_name).  *Mutator methods,* or *setters,* store values in objects or change the values of attributes (e.g., set_name).  

## Passing Objects as Arguments

When you pass an object as an argument, the thing that is passed into the parameter variable is a reference to the object.  As a result, the function or method that receives the object as an argument has access to the actual object. 

For instance, the following function accepts a `Coin` object as an argument, and it calls the object’s `toss` method.


    def flip(coin_obj):
      coin_obj.toss()


# 10.4 Techniques for Designing Classes
## The Unified Modeling Language

A UML diagram is used for depicting object-oriented systems.  A class in a UML diagram is represented as a box containing: the class name, data attributes, and methods.

## Finding the Classes in a Problem

Typically, your goal is to identify the different types of real-world objects that are present in the problem and then create classes for those types of objects within your application.  One technique to finding classes includes the following steps:

1. Get a written description of the problem domain.
2. Identify all the nouns (including pronouns and noun phrases) in the description.  Each of these is a potential class.
3. Refine the list to include only the classes that are relevant to the problem.

Let’s take a closer look at each step.

**Writing a Description of the Problem Domain**
The *problem domain* is the set of real-world objects, parties, and major events related to the problem.bb

For example, suppose we are writing a program that the manager of Joe’s Automotive Shop will use to print service quotes for customers.  Here is a description that an expert, perhaps Joe himself, may have written:


> Joe’s Automotive Shop services foreign cars and specializes in servicing cars made by Mercedes, Porsche, and BMW.  When a customer brings a car to the shop, the manager gets the customer’s name, address, and telephone number.  The manager then determines the make, model, and year of the car and gives the customer a service quote.  The service quote shows the estimated parts charges, estimated labor charges, sales tax, and total estimated charges.

The problem domain should include:

- Physical objects such as vehicles, machines, or products
- Any role played by a person, such as manager, employee, customer, teacher, student, etc.
- The results of a business event, such as a customer order, or in this case a service quote
- Record keeping items, such as customer histories and payroll records

**Identify All of the Nouns**

All of the nouns in the problem domain are in bold.


> **Joe’s Automotive Shop** services **foreign cars** and specializes in servicing cars made by **Mercedes**, **Porsche**, and **BMW**.  When a **customer** brings a **car** to the **shop**, the **manager** gets the **customer’s** **name**, **address**, and **telephone number**.  The **manager** then determines the **make**, **model**, and **year** of the **car** and gives the **customer** a **service quote**.  The **service quote** shows the **estimated parts charges**, **estimated labor charges**, **sales tax**, and **total estimated charges**.

Remove duplicated nouns.

**Refining the List of Nouns**

1. Some of the nouns really mean the same thing.

**car, cars,** and **foreign cars** refer to the same thing
**Joe’s Automotive Shop** and **shop** refer to the same company, “Joe’s Automotive Shop.”


2. Some nouns might represent items that we do not need to be concerned with in order to solve the problem.

We do not need **shop** because our app only needs to be concerned with individual service quotes, no need to work with company wide data.
We do not need **manager** because we aren’t processing info about the manager.


3. Some of the nouns might represent objects, not classes.

We can eliminate **Mercedes, Porsche,** and **BMW** as classes because they all represent a **car.**


4. Some of the nouns might represent simple values that can be assigned to a variable and do not require a class.

If a noun represents a type of item that would not have any identifiable data attributes or methods, then it can be eliminated.  To help determine whether a noun represents an item that would have data attributes and methods, ask the following questions about it:

- Would you use a group of related values to represent the item’s state?
- Are there any actions to be performed by the item?

If the answers to both of these questions are no, then the noun probably represents a value that can be stored in a simple variable.

After, we are left with the following classes:

- Car
- Customer
- ServiceQuote
## Identifying a Class’s Responsibilities

A class’s responsibilities are:

- The *things* that it should *know* (data attributes)
- The *actions* that is should *perform* (methods)

**The Customer Class**
Things that it should know:

- The customer’s name
- The customer’s address
- The customer’s telephone number

Actions that it should perform:

- Initialize an object of the Customer class
- set/return customer’s name
- set/return customer’s address
- set/return customer’s telephone number

**The Car Class**
Things that it should know:

- The car’s make
- The car’s model
- The car’s year

Actions that it should perform:

- Initialize an object of the Car class
- set/get make
- set/get model
- set/get year

**The ServiceQuote Class**
Things that it should know:

- Estimated parts charges
- Estimated labor charges
- Sales tax
- Total estimated charges

Things that it should perform:

- Initialize an object of the ServiceQuote class
- set/get parts charges
- set/get labor charges
- get sales tax
- get total charges

