# Chapter 11: Inheritance

# 11.1 Introduction to Inheritance

Inheritance allows a new class to extend an existing class.  This new class inherits the members of the class it extends.

## Generalization and Specialization

In the real world, you can find many objects that are specialized versions of other more general objects.  For example, the term “insect” describes a general type of creature with various characteristics.  Bees and grasshoppers are insects, therefore, they have all the general characteristics of an insect.  However, they have the ability to have characteristics of their own.

## Inheritance and the “Is a” Relationship

When one object is a specialized version of another object, there is a “is a” relationship between them.  Some examples:

- A poodle **is a** dog.
- A car **is a** vehicle.
- A flower **is a** plant.
- A rectangle **is a** shape.

Inheritance involves a superclass and a subclass.  The *superclass* is the general class and the *subclass* is the specialized class.  The subclass inherits attributes and methods from the superclass version without any of them having to be rewritten.

Very simple example of inheritance:


    class Automobile():
      def __init__(self, make, model, mileage, price):
        self.__make = make
        self.__model = model
        self.__mileage = mileage
        self.__price = price
    
    class Car(Automobile):
      def __init__(self, make, model, mileage, price, doors):
        Automobile.__init__(self, make, model, mileage, price)

Here, `Automobile` is the *superclass* of `Car` as indicated by:


    class Car(Automobile):

When we inherit from a parent, we must call it’s initialization method and pass `self`:


    Parent.__init__(self, ...)

Now, `Car` has access to all attributes and methods declared in `Automobile` and can make its own if needed.

# 11.2 Polymorphism

*Polymorphism* allows subclasses to have methods with the same names as methods in their superclasses.  It gives the ability for a program to call the correct method depending on the type of object that is used to call it.


    # animals.py
    class Mammal:
    
      def __init__(self, species):
        self.__species = species
    
      def show_species(self):
        print(f'I am a {self.species}.')
    
      def make_sound(self):
        print('Grrrrr')
    
    class Dog(Mammal):
    
      def __init__(self):
        Mammal.__init__(self, 'Dog')
    
      def make_sound(self):
        print('Woof! Woof!')
    
    # demo.py
      cow = animals.Mammal('Cow')
      print(cow.show_species()) # I am a cow.
      
      dog = animals.Dog()
      print(dog.show_species()) # I am a dog.


## The `isinstance` Function

Polymorphism provides great flexibility.  For example, consider the function:


    def show_mammal_info(creature):
      creature.show_species()
      creature.make_sound()

We can pass any object to the function so long as it has `show_species` and `make_sound` methods.

But… what happens if we pass an object to `show_mammal_info` that isn’t a mammal?


    show_mammal_info('I am a string')
    
    def show_mammal_info(creature):
      creature.show_species()
      creature.make_sound()

Since a string literal doesn’t have such methods, the following error is thrown:


    AttributeError: 'str' object has no attribute 'show_species'

This can be prevented with the built-in `isinstance(object, ClassName)` function.

